so as an astrophysicist one of the
questions i get asked all the time
is if the universe is expanding where
is the center but the universe doesn't
have a center and it's quite
difficult to wrap your head around that
fact especially
when you try and picture the universe
starting in a big bang
ever since which space has been
expanding to give us the universe that
we see
today and the problem comes with trying
to picture it in the first place right
the human brain
can't picture something like the big
bang but when it does
it pictures it as an explosion
but an explosion is sort of the exact
opposite of what the big bang
was it's actually very poorly named
because the big bang was neither big
nor a bank
so in a typical explosion material and
energy will radiate outwards from that
very central point
where the explosion occurred in space
and that's the key thing here in a
typical explosion is an explosion
in space at a specific location
whereas the big bang was more of an
explosion
of space space itself
was created in the big bang the entire
universe was so pinpointing location
in space when space didn't exist yet is
not something we can do
the big bang happened in the entire
universe at the same time
at the beginning the universe was a lot
smaller and has expanded
outwards since then so
the big bang happened everywhere so
point it any place in space
here the big bang happened here here the
big bang happened here
that point next to you right there yeah
just above your ear yeah the big bang
happened
right there too another way that we can
tell that the big bang wasn't a typical
explosion is from the distribution
of all of the matter and stuff in the
universe you know if you think of a
typical explosion
all of the lightest things will get
thrown the furthest because you need
less energy to throw them further
the further you go away from an
explosion this is the more space you
have to spread
that material out so from this sort of
distribution
of all the lightest things to the
heaviest things closer in you can
actually reconstruct really quite well
the trajectories that all of those
particles took in that explosion and
essentially reconstruct
where exactly the explosion occurred but
in the universe we find that it looks
pretty much the same
in all directions and at all distances
the same densities the same energies the
same
average number of galaxies in a given
volume
the universe just doesn't have those
same
telltale signatures of an explosion all
right so we now know not to picture the
big bang as your typical
explosion but the other thing that's
difficult for the brain to picture is
the expansion
of space we know that space is expanding
because when we look out
into the universe we see that the
majority of galaxies on average
are all moving away from us and
the greater the distance of a galaxy the
faster
it's moving away from us as well now
that can give us a little bit of a false
sense of importance here on earth
because
from our perspective it seems like all
of the galaxies are moving
away from us but really that's what it's
all down to it's just down to
perspective
if we're here in our galaxy and in one
direction we see a galaxy racing away
from us at 10 000 kilometers a second
in the exact opposite direction we see
another galaxy racing away from us at 10
000 kilometers a second
looks to us like everything's racing
away from us but if we could hop
over to another one of those galaxies
from that galaxy's perspective
our galaxy is racing away at 10 000
kilometers a second and the other one is
racing away at 20 000
kilometers a second again looking to
them
as if they are in the center and
everything is racing away from them now
the most famous analogy to help people
picture this has been used by the likes
of arthur eddington
fred hoyle and many a high school
science teacher over the years
and that is the case of blowing up a
balloon if i draw some galaxies on the
surface of a balloon and i blow it up
then this kind of reflects what's
happening
in space first of all we're not creating
more balloon to blow it up we're just
working with the same amount of balloon
we had at the beginning this is the same
thing that happens in the universe
the big bang created the entire universe
whether it was tiny
or whether it expanded to be huge we
haven't created anything new in the
process of
expanding it secondly all the points
move away from
each other there's no central point on
the surface of the balloon from which
all of those galaxies are moving away
from so that might have helped you
picture what's going on here now the
thing is it is an analogy it's not a
perfect description of what's going on
in the universe there's a lot of things
wrong with this analogy too that
sometimes i think can hinder
more than help so let's go through those
as well
firstly the obvious one is that the
surface of the balloon is our analogy
here but the surface
is 2d and not 3d like the real universe
you could describe anywhere you wanted
to go on the balloon or the simple sort
of north south east west
and you wouldn't need up and down that
third dimension does not mean
anything physical in the universe so yes
even though there is
a center to the 3d balloon and the fact
that you know it's in that
middle of the air pocket in the middle
of the balloon that doesn't mean
anything
physical in our analogy with the
universe there's nothing to do with
higher dimensions or anything like that
that's driving
the expansion it's just that you have to
picture the 2d surface of the balloon
working in the 3d dimensions of the
universe
second we stretch our galaxies when we
blow up the balloon now this doesn't
happen
in the universe galaxies are bound
together by the really strong gravity of
the supermassive black hole and the
hundreds of billions of stars and all
the gas
and dust that make them up and that
force of gravity is
stronger than the expansion of space
outwards and so the space between
stars in galaxies doesn't stretch
because
they're bound together by gravity
thirdly our 2d
surface of the balloon that is our
analogy with expanding space
is finite it wraps around on itself that
could be true for the universe but again
it might not be
it could be that it does have a finite
size or it could be that the universe is
infinite
we also don't know the shape of the
universe and so we don't know if it does
wrap around on itself like the 2d
balloon does again this is a weird one
for the brain to wrap its head around
because
we often picture the universe as a
sphere because
here on earth when we look out in any
direction into space
we can see as far as the places where
light has had enough time to reach us
since the beginning of the universe
about 14 billion years ago
so that is indeed a sphere but that
might not be the entire universe that's
just
the observable universe and that's
a really important distinction because
yes the observable universe is indeed a
sphere
with you right at the very center you
know you looking up at the night sky
and observing the universe you can only
see
as far as the light that's had enough
time to travel to you
but beyond that is the entire
universe which we don't know the shape
of but we know
that it doesn't have a center and we
have so
many observations to support that as
well picking my favorite of these you
know the observations from
the largest galaxy survey that we've
ever done the sloan digital
sky survey which recorded the
distribution the position
and the motion of over a million
galaxies in the northern
sky here's a visualization actually
showing the data they took
placing the images that they took with
the telescope at the positions and the
distances
they recorded and when we study the
motions of these galaxies as a whole
their
bulk motion there's no sign of a central
point
around which all of them are moving now
admittedly
that is only what we can see perhaps we
can't see
enough of the universe to really
appreciate
what's actually going on kind of like
you know when you have to zoom out of
something before you can see
the pattern in it perhaps you know our
models and our theories are only
actually accurate for the observable
universe
and not the entire universe and therein
lies the problem because we'll never
know
we'll never be able to know because we
can never see
further than the observable universe
and so we kind of just have to work with
what we've got and what we actually can
see and
what we've got is telling us that the
universe
doesn't have a center before we get to
the bloopers i just want to thank this
week's video sponsor
brilliant brilliant is a website that
helps you to
learn really complex ideas with
interactive courses that
break down problems into easy to
understand chunks and get you start
thinking like a scientist plus they're
fun too
now if you want to understand more of
the models and the maths behind the
stuff we've talked about in this video
including the big bang and the expansion
of space then check out their cosmology
course
see here's the equation describing the
expansion of space reflected by that
balloon analogy we had in this video so
it's high level stuff but this is why
brilliant is so
good because it breaks down these
problems and gets you to learn
by doing so that you actually are able
to learn
and remember this stuff so if that
sounds like something that you'd be up
for and you want to support me and my
channel then head to
brilliant.org forward slash dr becky
that's d-r-b-e-c-k-y
and sign up completely for free plus the
first 200 people to go to that link will
also get
20 off an annual premium subscription
champion
so thanks very much brilliant and now
for all those places
when you try and picture the universe
starting in a big bang
ever since which ever since which
here in what looks to be the center of
the universe however as we've just heard
motorbike damn it it's 30 000 lions from
galactic central point
we go round every 200 million years
our galaxy is only one of millions of
billions in this amazing and expanding
[Music]
universe